Good day, brothers and sisters!
Our next session will begin
with a music-video presentation.
This video shows the beauty of creation
and the beauty of our worldwide brotherhood,
both of which bring glory to Jehovah.
Let’s watch and listen.
Our opening song is an opportunity
for each of us to give praise to Jehovah.
Let’s sing song number 2,
entitled “Jehovah Is Your Name.”
Again, that’s song number 2.
When we examine the things Jehovah has made,
we see his marvelous qualities,
but can we learn even more?
The following six-part symposium
will show how meditating on creation
can strengthen our faith
in Jehovah’s promises.
Each speaker will introduce the next.
Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present the first talk entitled
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith—Stars.”
In each of the parts of this symposium,
the speaker will help us to see
not only the wonder of creation
but also the thunder of creation.
We will hear Jehovah’s words
like thunder—loud and clear.
Please find Nehemiah 9:6 with me,
and notice the faith-strengthening effect
that creation has on the angels above.
Nehemiah 9:6:
“You alone are Jehovah;
“you made the heavens,
yes, the heaven of the heavens
“and all their army,
the earth and all that is on it,
“the seas and all that is in them.
“And you preserve all of them alive,
and the army of the heavens
are bowing down to you.”
Well, that verse
extols Jehovah as the Creator.
But did you notice the expression
“the heaven of the heavens”?
What is that?
Well, that refers to the complete extent
of the physical heavens
—the atmospheric heavens,
the heavens of outer space.
And at the top
of the heavens’ outer space, that rim,
that is the heaven of the heavens
—the highest heavens.
Now, when we look at the heavens,
what do we see?
What do we feel?
Well, in that verse,
did you notice it mentions (first time)
“the heavens and all their army”?
That’s referring
to the physical army of the heavens
—the stars, the planets, the galaxies.
But did you notice in the last sentence
that there is another “army of the heavens”?
And that refers to the holy angels of God.
And just contemplating the physical creation,
the angels are moved
to bow down or worship Jehovah.
Contemplating the creation
can have a similar effect on us.
Now, each talk of this symposium will discuss
how meditating on an aspect of creation
will build our faith in Jehovah’s promises.
Let’s watch a video about the stars,
and then we will have
a faith-strengthening application
to our resurrection hope.
Our sun is considered an average star.
Yet, the energy from the sun
that reaches the earth is thousands of times
the world’s total energy use.
With our unaided eyes,
we might see about 3,000 stars
on a dark night
—many in a fuzzy band.
The Milky Way galaxy
is where our sun
is just one of perhaps
200 to 400 billion stars.
Astronomers think the Milky Way galaxy
is clustered together
with around 100,000 large galaxies
in a massive structure called a supercluster
that together with an estimated
two trillion galaxies
make up the known physical universe.
Countless stars
spread over unfathomable distances,
releasing immense amounts of energy
may be impossible to grasp for us
—but not for Jehovah.
“He counts the number of the stars;
“he calls all of them by name.
Our Lord is great and is mighty in power.”
In just a two-minute video about the stars,
we see the awesome wonder,
but do we hear the thunder?
Do we hear the clear, undeniable application
from Jehovah, our Creator?
Well, I invite you
to turn with me to Isaiah 40:26, please.
What can we come to appreciate about Jehovah
by pondering the magnitude
and the magnificence of the stars?
Well, at Isaiah 40:26,
Jehovah says to look at the stars.
He says:
“Lift up your eyes to heaven and see.
“Who has created these things [the wonder]?
“It is the One who brings
out their army by number;
“he calls them all by name.
“Because of his vast dynamic energy
and his awe-inspiring power,
not one of them is missing.”
Well, in the video we saw,
it estimated that there are
two trillion galaxies in outer space,
each with billions of stars.
So do the math.
How many names of inanimate objects
does Jehovah have in his memory?
How many can he possibly contain?
But did you notice
that at the end of that verse,
it says that “not one of them are missing”?
It is said that there are
a billion, trillion stars.
So I have to ask you,
“Would Jehovah remember your name?
your loved one’s name?”
“Not one of them is missing.”
Not one star goes missing to Jehovah.
Well, how about our dead loved ones?
Did they go missing?
My favorite verses
when a faithful servant of Jehovah dies
are Romans 14:7-9.
In verse 8, it says:
“If we live
“[or] if we die,
we belong to Jehovah.”
The status with Jehovah
does not change at death.
That person did not go missing.
But what about those of us
who have loved ones
who at the time of their death,
they had not come to learn
about or put faith in Jehovah?
What about that?
Well, think about this:
If Jehovah had the ability, the power,
to create those huge stars and galaxies,
he can recreate all
—all—those sleeping in the memorial tombs.
Find John 5:28, 29.
Let’s verify that so that all of us,
whether the dead loved one
was previously a faithful Witness or not,
all of us, can entertain
the hope of the resurrection.
John 5:28, 29:
“Do not be amazed at this,
“for the hour is coming in which all
“[all] those in the memorial tombs
will hear his voice and come out,
“those who did good things
to a resurrection of life,
“and those who practiced
[you see, even] vile things
to a resurrection of judgment.”
Yes, they’ll be restored to life
and they’ll have the opportunity
to come to love the One who gifted them
with the miracle of a resurrection.
Now, in our video,
right at the end (on screen),
there was a quotation of Psalm 147:4, 5.
And in verse 4, it says
that ‘Jehovah counts all the stars’
—the billions, trillions, or more of them.
It says that he named each one
—the billions or trillions of them.
That is amazing indeed.
But we’d like to learn
another lesson from the book of Job.
In Job 14, please,
we’re going to read verses 13 and 15.
When a star burns out,
it does not go missing to Jehovah.
No doubt he remembers its name,
but he is not motivated to resurrect
that star back to light
so that it can again
twinkle in a dark night sky.
But what about humans?
We were created in the image
of Jehovah God and his Son, Christ Jesus.
At Job 14:13,
Job says:
“O that in the Grave you would conceal me,
“that you would hide me
until your anger passes by,
that you would set a time limit
for me and remember me!”
And in verse 14, it’s obviously
talking about the resurrection.
But would Job, in effect,
just become a burned-out star?
No.
Unlike a burned-out star,
Jehovah yearns—he longs—to call back
each human to life
so that we can again see
that starlike twinkle in their eyes.
And now verse 15:
“You [that’s Jehovah] will call,
and I will answer you.”
You see, from the grave, “I will answer you.”
“You will long for the work of your hands.”
But Jehovah has the memory
to bring back people.
He has the power to bring back people,
and he has the longing
to bring back people to life.
Friends, observe the stars.
Have faith that you will see
your resurrected loved ones.
And now, Brother Patrick LaFranca,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will continue this symposium with his talk,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith—Oceans.”
Have you ever stood on the ocean shore,
enjoying the salt spray,
watching the breakers dash against the rocks
or run up onto the sandy beach
then withdraw?
Many enjoy spending hours at the ocean.
We never stop marveling
at its beauty and its immense size.
On the other hand, many fear
the destructive power of the ocean.
Like other natural forces,
the ocean can act like a powerful giant
that sometimes goes on a rampage.
What can man do to stop
the wall of water of a tsunami
from approaching the coastline?
The power of storm waves
is almost unbelievable.
They have been known to throw
boulders weighing 7,000 pounds
over a wall 20 feet high.
Can we trust that Jehovah in the future
will bring the oceans
and other natural forces
into perfect balance?
In the following video, note how the oceans
give loud and clear evidence
of Jehovah’s wisdom and power.
Millions of cubic meters of water
circulate continually around our planet.
Near the poles, water that is colder,
saltier, and denser sinks,
creating a flow almost 100 times
that of the Amazon River.
This drives a massive circulation of water
that may take 1,000 years to complete
—the global ocean conveyor belt.
This enormous system distributes heat,
which helps to stabilize the weather
and transport great quantities
of nutrients around the world
so that life
may flourish in abundance.
Jehovah set these mechanisms in motion
and understands them perfectly.
“You rule over the raging of the sea;
when its waves surge, you calm them.”
As we saw in our video,
the oceans are essential
to sustain life on the earth.
Sadly, however, greedy men
have trashed them with pollution.
Global warming has caused
ocean levels to rise,
threatening coastal areas.
Experts are concerned that the natural forces
are so out of balance
that soon the planet
will no longer sustain life.
Yet, friends, if Jehovah had
the wisdom and power
to create the earth’s oceans,
when his time comes to bring
all natural forces back into perfect balance,
he can certainly cause us
to live in harmony with them.
Though the oceans might appear
to be uncontrollable,
we know that Jehovah is vastly more powerful.
Note how Psalm 93:4 describes his power,
Psalm 93:4:
“Above the sound of many waters,
“mightier than the breaking waves of the sea,
Jehovah is majestic in the heights.”
Yes, the great sea may lift up
its powerful waves to heaven,
but it is no match for our majestic,
Almighty God.
Jehovah’s powerful ability
to perfectly control the oceans
gives us great confidence
that he is also perfectly capable
of protecting us, his people.
In Jeremiah 5:22, notice how Jehovah
reminds his people of his power.
Jeremiah 5:22:
“‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah,
“‘Should you not tremble before me?
“‘It is I who placed the sand
“‘as the boundary for the sea,
“‘a permanent regulation
that it cannot pass over.
“‘Although its waves toss,
they cannot prevail;
although they roar,
they still cannot pass beyond it.’”
Yes, Almighty God placed the sand
as the boundary for the sea.
So when its furious waves pound against sand,
the sand absorbs their impact
and the force vanishes.
Since Jehovah controls
the literal roaring sea
from going beyond its boundaries,
can he not also protect his people
when the wicked sea of humanity threatens us
with its violent storms?
Jehovah’s control over vast waters
was well demonstrated
when he protected the Israelites
by allowing them to cross
the Red Sea on dry land.
Now, the Red Sea has an average depth
of over 1,600 feet.
It is estimated that at the point
where the Israelites crossed it,
the depth of the sea was as much as 50 feet.
Imagine being an Israelite
walking through this corridor
with walls of water on each side of you
some 50 feet high.
And then Jehovah used
those same walls of water to collapse,
drowning their enemies, the Egyptians.
Yes, Jehovah controlled those vast waters
to deliver an entire nation
from a world power.
And do you recall the account
in Mark 4:37-39
when God empowered his Son, Jesus,
to control the sea and the wind?
When Jesus and the disciples
were crossing the Sea of Galilee in a boat,
a great windstorm caused the sea to rage,
and it threatened to fill up their boat.
What did Jesus do?
He commanded the wind and the sea
with the words, “Hush!
Be quiet!”
And the raging wind and sea calmed down.
So on this occasion, Jesus showed
what he will do
as King of God’s Kingdom
during the millennium.
He will control forces of nature.
There will be no need to fear the ocean.
In recent years, disastrous storms
are becoming more frequent and severe.
What used to be considered extreme
—massive floods, killer droughts,
and monster snow storms—
is the new normal.
Many experts now put the blame
on human activity
that has affected the oceans and the climate.
So, yes, men continue to ruin
the earth today.
But here’s the good news.
During the millennium,
by means of his Kingdom,
our wise Creator will undo
all the damage done by humans.
Everything will function in harmony
with Jehovah’s principles,
and we will learn how to properly care
for this beautiful planet.
And as we do, everything will be brought back
into proper balance,
including the climate and the oceans.
While some men today fear that the earth
will be destroyed because of man’s abuse,
Jehovah gives us this comforting promise
at Psalm 104:5,
Psalm 104:5:
“He has established the earth
on its foundations;
“it will not be moved from its place
forever and ever.”
Yes, the beautiful, deep, and dark blue ocean
will roll on forever.
The Creator will make sure of that.
By our observing the oceans
and meditating on what we see,
we can build our faith that soon
we will enjoy Jehovah’s creation
forever without fear.
Brother James Mantz,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith—Forests.”
What would we do without forests?
Forests help to sustain
our supply of fresh water,
they purify the air,
and forests convert carbon dioxide
into life-sustaining oxygen.
Yes, forests are vital to our existence.
Yet, scientists warn
that we’re in danger of losing
this precious resource.
This causes some people to wonder
whether God cares
about what’s happening to the forest.
We may even ask, ‘Will the loss of forests
affect God’s ability to fulfill his promise
to make the earth a paradise?’
The simple answer to that question
is absolutely not!
Jehovah has everything under control.
Please watch the following video.
It will strengthen your faith
in the Designer of the forest.
Trees can grow very strong
and withstand powerful forces.
But if they didn’t decompose after they die,
trees and leaves would pile up
with their nutrients locked away inside.
Yet, they do decompose.
How?
Most animals cannot eat
fallen wood and leaves,
but fungi can.
They break down the dead plant tissues,
making them softer.
Beetles and termites
bore through the wood,
exposing more surface area
and spreading the fungi inside,
which soften it further
so that other insects
can enjoy the feast.
Earthworms aerate the soil
and pull nutrients down
where they can be used by other plants.
Decomposers have been called
the unsung heroes of the natural world.
They recycle organic matter
so that it is available
to support new life.
Through this process,
Jehovah made it possible for us
to enjoy earth’s lush beauty
—generation after generation.
“Let the fields
and everything in them rejoice.
“At the same time let all the trees
of the forest shout joyfully.”
Amazing!
Will you ever look at a forest
in the same way again?
Think about what the decomposition
and recycling of organic matter
means for us and our future.
Those beetles, termites, and earthworms
—the unsung heroes of the natural world—
will keep on doing their job
throughout eternity.
Reflect for a moment:
If Jehovah had the wisdom to create forests
that can replenish themselves,
surely he knows how to undo the damage
that man has done to the earth.
Jehovah hasn’t revealed all the details
of how he is going to restore the earth,
but we can be confident
that he will fulfill his promise
to make “all things new.”
Please open your Bibles
to Psalm 37:10, 11, 29.
This scripture contains a promise
regarding man and the earth.
Psalm 37:10, 11, 29
reads:
“Just a little while longer,
and the wicked will be no more;
“you will look at where they were,
and they will not be there.
“But the meek will possess the earth,
“and they will find exquisite delight
“in the abundance of peace.
“The righteous will possess the earth,
and they will live forever on it.”
How reassuring!
People who are righteous and meek
will be on the earth forever,
and that earth will be a paradise.
But there are at least two requirements
for Jehovah to accomplish this.
He’s already taken care
of the first requirement.
We saw proof of that in the video.
Jehovah created the forest
with an amazing rejuvenation system.
So in spite of man’s prolonged misuse
of the forest,
Jehovah has already put in place
the mechanism to undo
all the damage that man has done.
Doesn’t the marvelous design of the forest
build your faith in Jehovah’s promise
of a paradise?
The second requirement
to make the earth a paradise
is described in verse 10
of Psalm 37 that we just read.
There it says:
“And the wicked will be no more.”
Not only will Jehovah undo
the damage that men have done
but he will also remove
the source of the problem.
Greedy men who exploit and misuse
this precious resource will be gone.
Therefore, we have no reason to fear
that humans will continue to ruin the earth
until it reaches the point of no return.
Jehovah knows what is going on.
Please open your Bibles
to Revelation chapter 11,
and we’ll read verse 18.
This scripture assures us
that Jehovah cares about our planet
because it is his planet,
and it confirms
that he is going to hold men accountable
for their actions.
Revelation 11:18 says:
“But the nations became wrathful,
and your own wrath came,
“and the appointed time came
for the dead to be judged
“and to reward your slaves the prophets
and the holy ones
“and those fearing your name,
the small and the great,
“and to bring to ruin
those ruining the earth.”
Jehovah is not going to let wicked men
ruin his beautiful creation.
Nothing can stop Jehovah
from carrying out his purpose for the earth.
Our examination of the forest
has strengthened our faith
that Jehovah will accomplish
everything that he has in mind to do.
The words of faithful Job
reflect our conviction
that that promise will come true.
As recorded at Job 42:2,
Job was moved to declare regarding Jehovah:
“Now I know that you are able
to do all things
“and that nothing you have in mind to do
is impossible for you.”
What does Jehovah have in mind to do?
One thing is to transform the earth
into a paradise
with rich, abundant forests
—forests that will continue to help sustain
our supply of fresh water,
to purify our air,
and to convert carbon dioxide into oxygen.
The video that we just watched
quoted Psalm 96:12, which declares:
“Let all the trees of the forest
shout joyfully.”
By their very existence,
forests praise their Creator.
And we can add our joyful shouts of praise
to those of the forest.
Therefore, may we continue to use creation
to build our faith,
because if we do that,
we will see
the restored life-sustaining forests
bring happiness to perfect humans
and praise to their Creator, Jehovah,
forever.
Brother Leonard Myers,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith
—Wind and Water.”
When we think of events
that will soon happen,
such as the great tribulation
and Armageddon,
wouldn’t you agree that we need
to build our faith now?
In fact, if you turn with me
to Ezekiel chapter 38
(you may want to put a marker there),
verses 14 and 15 describe the time
when God’s people will experience
an all-out assault by those determined
to destroy pure worship.
Verse 14 mentions that Gog
—or, as we know, a coalition of nations—
will come against God’s people.
And though verse 18 states that on that day
Jehovah’s “great rage will flare up”
against his enemies,
the question is,
Will you and I remain confident
in Jehovah’s promise to rescue his people?
We can build our faith
by considering another aspect of creation,
the awesome power of wind and water.
Please allow the following video
to strengthen your faith.
Hail
—though it is made of ice,
it is very different from snow.
Hail usually forms in warm weather
when turbulent air produces thunderstorms
with powerful updrafts.
Those updrafts can pull a piece of dust
or ice high into the cloud,
where water freezes around it.
Each trip up into the cloud
adds a layer of ice
and waits
until it becomes
a hailstone that is heavy enough to fall.
Hailstorms can be powerfully destructive.
One deadly storm dropped hailstones
weighing more than one kilogram (2 lbs) each.
Jehovah used hail to demonstrate his power
and defend his people,
such as during
the seventh plague against Egypt.
When Joshua fought the Amorites,
Jehovah caused a great hailstorm,
and more Amorites died from the hailstones
than in battle.
Hail is also mentioned among the elements
that Jehovah will use in the future
against those who attack his people.
“Have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
“which I have reserved
for the . . . day of battle and war?”
As the video showed,
wind and water in the form of hail
are powerful and can
at times be very destructive.
For example, a report in Awake!
magazine some years ago reported
that at times humans are hurt
—even killed—
by hailstones weighing
as much as one and a half pounds
and as big as five inches in diameter.
That’s larger than this ball.
And there are scientific reports
of even larger hailstones.
But as we know, Jehovah can use wind
and water to fight for his people.
Why, he is the Source
of these natural forces,
and he can control them perfectly.
Please turn with me to Psalm 147,
and let’s notice that together
—Psalm 147—
we’ll look at verses 17 and 18
for the assurance that Jehovah
is the Source of these natural forces,
Psalm 147:17:
“He hurls down his hailstones
like morsels of bread.
“Who can withstand his cold?
“He sends out his word, and they melt.
He makes his wind blow,
and the waters flow.”
Did you notice to whom
these natural forces belong?
Verse 17 speaks of “his  hailstones.”
Verse 18 says: “He makes his  wind blow.”
Yes, Jehovah is the Source,
and he can control them.
He proved this in the past.
Do you remember the examples
given in the video?
One was the account in Joshua chapter 10
when the Israelites
were fighting the Amorites.
Verse 11 states that “while [the Amorites]
were fleeing from Israel . . . ,
“Jehovah hurled great hailstones
“from the sky on them . . . ,
and they perished.
“In fact, more died from the hail
than from the sword of the Israelites.”
If Jehovah can create
such powerful elements and control them,
that should build our faith.
It should convince us that he’ll be able
to use these powerful elements
in the future when he defends
his people at Armageddon.
The video partially quoted
a scripture that emphasizes that point.
Let’s read it together—Job chapter 38,
Job 38,
and notice with me verses 22 and 23.
Job 38:22:
“Have you entered
the storehouses of the snow,
“or have you seen
the storehouses of the hail,
“which I have reserved
for the time of distress,
for the day of battle and war?”
Did you notice that Jehovah
says he ‘has storehouses of hail
reserved for the day of battle’?
Psalm 135:7 mentions ‘storehouses of wind.’
In these verses, Jehovah speaks
of things he’s reserved under his control
for special purposes.
How can this knowledge
of Jehovah’s storehouses build our faith?
When we’re attacked during
the great tribulation by God’s enemies,
no matter how powerful
or threatening they may seem,
they can’t possibly survive Jehovah’s anger.
For example, if we go back
to Ezekiel chapter 38
and glance at verse 22,
we see things Jehovah will use
against those enemies of pure worship.
Besides pestilence, fire, and sulfur,
notice what else Jehovah will use.
In the middle of the verse, it says:
“I will rain down a torrential downpour
and hailstones.”
Yes, Jehovah will use water.
He may use hailstones of undisclosed size
to destroy those wicked humans.
Now, during that time,
will we need to fear the natural elements?
Not at all.
Second Peter 2:9 assures us:
“Jehovah knows how to rescue people
of godly devotion out of trial.”
Jehovah will perfectly control
the natural elements
so his people are not harmed.
This knowledge about the awesome power
of wind and water
should make us powerful by faith.
It should build our faith not only in
Jehovah’s ability to protect us in the future
but also in his protection now.
For instance, we have no reason to fear bans
or threats from worldly governments.
The One who controls the storehouses
of the wind and hail is our Helper.
According to Hebrews 13:6,
we do not need to “be afraid.”
That’s true now,
and it will be true in the future
when Jehovah brings the natural elements
at his disposal against our enemies.
Notice his assurance
at the end of Ezekiel chapter 38;
notice verse 23:
“And I will certainly magnify myself
and sanctify myself
“and make myself known
before the eyes of many nations;
and they will have
to know that I am Jehovah.”
What a thrilling time that will be!
As these enemies are defeated,
they will know that it is
Jehovah God who is bringing
destruction upon them.
May our anticipation of that happy outcome
and our study of creation build our faith now
as we confidently look forward
to Jehovah’s complete victory.
Brother Robert Luccioni,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith
—Sea Creatures.”
Are you struggling to provide
for yourself or your family?
Many today lack the basic necessities,
such as food, clean water, adequate housing.
And this causes some to question
whether God really cares about humans.
But as Jehovah’s people, we are different.
We know that Jehovah
cares for all of his creation.
But we all know
that it is a test of our faith
when things get difficult.
So the question is,
How can we build our faith
so that we are strong and so that it
can help us get through difficult times?
Well, one way is by examining how Jehovah
provides for his animal creation.
Now, why is that helpful?
Well, that examination gives us confidence
that he will care for us as well.
As an example, in the following video,
note how Jehovah provides food
for a massive sea creature.
The largest animal alive on earth today
is also the largest that has ever lived
—the blue whale.
Blue whales can grow to be
over 30 meters (98 feet) long
and weigh up to 180 tons.
Its heart alone may weigh
several hundred kilograms.
How does such a large creature
find enough to eat?
The blue whale migrates great distances
to find tiny crustaceans
known as krill.
When a blue whale
finds a school of krill,
it accelerates toward the krill
and opens its giant mouth.
They may engulf
hundreds of kilograms of krill
with each lunge
amounting to several tons per day.
Blue whales eat a lot.
Yet, Jehovah provides for them,
and he will provide for us.
“There is the sea, so great and wide,
“teeming with countless living things,
both small and great.”
Now, we are amazed at the way Jehovah
provides for all of his animal creation,
including the sea creatures.
The Bible describes this well
if you look at Psalm 104:27, 28
—Psalm 104:27, 28:
“All of them wait for you
to give them their food in its season.
“What you give them, they gather.
When you open your hand,
they are satisfied with good things.”
Yes, meditating on this
aspect of creation builds our faith.
For example, from the video,
do you remember the size of this creature?
Now, can you imagine
if you had the assignment
to feed just one blue whale?
You just make sure
that one whale has enough to eat every day.
Can you imagine that?
Where would we start?
We’d have to hire teams of people
and figure out how to get the food
and how to move the food
to where the blue whale is swimming
(after we figure out where it’s swimming).
Why, it would be a full-time job!
And that would be to feed just one whale,
and there are thousands of them.
And yet, Jehovah has it
all arranged day after day.
We don’t even think about it.
You notice here in verse 27,
it says that “all of them wait
for [Jehovah] to give them their food.”
Now, it doesn’t mean that the whale
just kind of floats on the top of the water
and waits for food to jump in its mouth.
No, it swims; it looks for the food.
When it finds it, it goes after it.
But Jehovah provides it.
In verse 28, it says:
“What [he] give[s] them, they gather.”
Now, you cannot imagine
that blue whale thinking: ‘Come on, really?
‘I’m 180 tons, and you’re
going to feed me with a little crustacean?
Couldn’t we have just worked out
that I eat a couple of big tuna every day?’
No, they gather what Jehovah gives them.
And verse 28 goes on to say
that “they are satisfied
with” Jehovah’s provisions.
So, what’s the point?
Well, did you notice
the comment in the video?
It said: “Jehovah provides for them,
and he will provide for us.”
See, meditating on creation
can build our faith
—strengthen our faith—
in Jehovah’s support.
Note the four lessons that we learn
from how Jehovah cares for his creation.
The first is that if Jehovah has the desire
to care for animals
and provide for their needs,
do you think that Jehovah has the desire
to care for you and your family?
Remember what Jesus
expressed at Matthew 6:26,
where he explained
how Jehovah cares for His creation,
even the small birds, and he said:
“Are you not worth more than they are?”
Yes, if Jehovah feels compelled
to care for his animal creation,
we can be assured that he feels compelled
to care for you and your family.
A second lesson is that we do not need
to be unduly anxious about tomorrow.
Rather, we can confidently ask
Jehovah for our daily needs.
Look at Matthew 6:31, 32
—Matthew 6:31, 32.
It says: “So never be anxious and say,
‘‘‘What are we to eat?’
“or, ‘What are we to drink?’
or, ‘What are we to wear?’
“For all these are the things
the nations are eagerly pursuing.
Your heavenly Father knows
that you need all these things.”
Yes, Jehovah knows we need them.
He knows exactly what we need,
and he promises to provide it.
And if Jehovah has the capacity
to feed a 180-ton blue whale,
do you think he has the capacity
to feed you and me and our families?
Absolutely!
See, we do the best that we can,
and then we trust in Jehovah to do the rest.
And like it mentioned
there in Psalms with the animal creation,
we “wait” on Jehovah
and we “are satisfied with” what he provides.
Our third point is that Jehovah
will not abandon us when we face trials.
Look at Hebrews chapter 13
and the latter part of verse 5
—Hebrews 13:5.
He says: “I will never leave you,
and I will never abandon you.”
Jehovah will never abandon us.
He will care for us
even through our hard times.
Now, how can that help us?
Well, that can help us to make good decisions
—good decisions regarding our employment,
care for our family, worship of Jehovah.
We well remember
Jesus’ words at Matthew 6:33,
where he says:
“[Seek] first the Kingdom . . .
and all these other things
will be [given] to you.”
And finally, our fourth point:
Jehovah promises that he will abundantly care
for all of our needs in the future.
We think of that beautiful promise
at Isaiah 65:22,
where it says: “For the days of my people
will be like the days of a tree.”
Now, the blue whale
is thought to live 80 to 90 years,
and Jehovah keeps providing for it.
He does not have
a limited supply of provisions.
Well, that gives us confidence
that it’s not beyond Jehovah’s ability
to fulfill his promise
and care for us through all eternity.
So, yes, Jehovah’s Word and his creation
give us irrefutable proof
of his constant, loving care
—proof that he cares for us today,
proof that he will care for us
through our difficult days,
and proof that he will care for us
through all eternity.
So may all of us continue to build our faith,
fortify our trust in Jehovah,
become powerful by faith.
We need that faith now,
and we most definitely
will need it to face what is to come.
Now Brother Ron Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present
the final talk of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith
—Our Bodies.”
Are you tired of being tired?
Are you sick of being sick?
Many of us are feeling the impact
of living in this old system of things.
But what can we do?
Well, we try to improve our health
or find some relief by medical means
or by improving our diet,
exercise, and getting more rest.
But the bottom line is,
we are infected with sin,
and with sin comes sickness
and the effects of aging.
There’s promise after promise,
but are they really true?
There is no pill, medicine,
diet, or exercise program
that can give us complete relief
—removal of sickness
or, what we really want
and what we need, perfect health.
But there is a promise
recorded in God’s Word
that does give us confidence.
Let’s read this together
at Isaiah chapter 33.
At Isaiah chapter 33,
notice the reassuring words from Jehovah
through the prophet Isaiah in verse 24.
And there it says:
“And no resident
[no one] will say: ‘I am sick.’
The people dwelling in the land
will be pardoned for their error.”
So sin will be removed in God’s new world.
Do you believe that?
Can we really put faith in Jehovah’s promise?
Yes.
This is not just another empty promise
by a human.
This comes from our Creator, Jehovah.
Yes, he can guarantee it.
But what can we do today
to build up our faith in those promises?
Well, as highlighted in this symposium,
we can take the time and stop
to look at Jehovah’s creation.
So let’s do that right now.
Let’s examine the human body
and its amazing ability to repair itself.
Please watch the following video.
Our bones
are amazing.
They support our bodies,
protect our organs,
and store almost all
of the body’s calcium
—a mineral essential
for our health.
For their weight,
bones are very strong.
The feet of a track and field jumper
may experience forces
of several times his body weight.
Bones can compress and bend,
but sometimes they break.
A fractured bone
can heal well if properly set.
Inflammation brings
organic building blocks to the area,
and soft tissue grows
between the broken pieces.
The soft tissue
is replaced with harder tissue.
The body replaces the harder tissue
with new bone until the repair is complete.
In children,
the break may heal
without leaving a trace.
Jehovah gave every bone in our body
this incredible ability to heal.
“I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way
I am wonderfully made.”
Well, that was an amazing video.
We learned a lot
about what happens on the inside.
We take it for granted
that when we get a cut or broken bone,
our body automatically heals itself.
King David was very impressed
with the way that he was made
and the way the human body works.
But he did not have the modern technology
and knowledge that we have today
—an X-ray machine or a microscope—
but he observed Jehovah’s creation,
and he knew that we were designed
in an awe-inspiring way.
Let’s read what he says at Psalm 139
—Psalm 139:14—
and I’m sure you feel the same way.
He says:
“I praise you
“because in an awe-inspiring way
I am wonderfully made.
Your works are wonderful,
I know this very well.”
So, what helped David
to build a strong faith in Jehovah
and his promises for the future?
Well, did you read there?
He says: “I know this very well.”
David took the time to stop
and observe Jehovah’s creations.
That’s what helped him
to put faith in Jehovah.
Yes, he took the time,
not to be distracted
by other things going on around him,
but to observe Jehovah’s creations.
That’s what inspired him,
and that’s what motivated him
to give praise to Jehovah.
And we need to do the same.
Yes, we are far
from the perfect health and life
that Jehovah had intended for the future.
But even so,
we are made in an awe-inspiring way.
Jehovah wants us to continue living.
It’s plain to see.
And as we saw in the video,
our bodies are amazing in that they
can continue to repair themselves
even without a conscious thought.
But therein lies a problem.
We could be so busy with our lives
that we don’t stop
and take that time to have a thought:
‘Why did Jehovah make this?
Why did he create me the way he did?’
Yes, we’re busy thinking
about how we’ll care for our families,
pay the bills,
or maybe take care of our health.
But like David, we need to stop, pause,
think deeply about what Jehovah has made.
Don’t miss out on an opportunity
to be inspired, like David,
with all the inspiring creations around us.
And think about this:
If Jehovah could create our bodies
with the ability to repair themselves,
like we saw in the video,
he can certainly heal all infirmities.
He can reverse the aging process,
and he can prevent sickness in his new world.
While on earth, Jesus proved
with the power he was given from Jehovah
that he could cure “every sort of disease
and every sort of infirmity.”
“Every sort” meant everything
from healing the blind, the lame,
those with epilepsy, leprosy
to raising the dead to life.
That truly is an amazing thing to ponder.
Now, that must have been
an amazing thing to see back then.
But what Jesus did
was just a preview on a small scale
of what he will do
in the future worldwide on a large scale
under God’s Kingdom arrangement
during the Millennium.
We will finally see
that promise we read in Isaiah
that “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
Why?
Because Jesus will use his kingly power
to bring about perfect health
—yes, lasting health.
Jehovah’s promises fill us with hope.
They fill us with confidence
that every sort of disease and illness
—anything that we’re going through now—
is only temporary,
knowing that permanent perfect health
is soon to come.
This symposium has considered examples
ranging from the heavens
all the way to the inner workings
of our amazing bodies.
Jehovah left his imprint
on all of his creations.
The evidence is clearly seen; it’s evident.
What must we do today
to build our faith and confidence
in Jehovah’s promises?
Notice what Romans 1:20 has to say.
There in verse 20,
Romans 1:20:
“For his invisible qualities are clearly seen
“from the world’s creation onward, [why?]
“because they are perceived
by the things made,
“even his eternal power and Godship,
so that they are inexcusable.”
Let’s focus in on the word “perceived.”
It’s interesting that the study note
says that “perceived” means
more than just seeing something
with our literal eyes.
It means “grasping [or understanding]
with [our] mind.”
One Bible translation says:
“God’s qualities are
‘visible . . .  to the eye of reason.’”
That’s interesting.
So when we see Jehovah’s creations,
take the time, like David did,
to stop and think deeply.
Meditate on what we can learn
from that creation
—what it tells us about our Creator, Jehovah.
What happens
when we perceive Jehovah’s wisdom,
his power, his justice,
his love in creations?
It strengthens our faith
in his promises now
as well as in the future.
May we always be inspired and stay inspired
by Jehovah’s awe-inspiring creations,
and thus we will always be inspired
by our Almighty God and Creator, Jehovah!
Thank you, brothers,
for helping us think deeply
about the things Jehovah has made
and the things he will do.
What wonderful blessings
we have to look forward to!
We now invite you to sing song number 148,
entitled “Jehovah Provides Escape.”
Again, that’s song number 148.